New docs for debugging deadlock and high CPU usage (#19534)
dotnet/docs: docs/core/diagnostics/debug-highcpu.md

---
title: Debug high CPU usage - .NET Core

> description: A tutorial walk-through, debugging high CPU usage in .NET Core.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
description: A tutorial that walks you through debugging high CPU usage in .NET Core.
```

ms.topic: tutorial
ms.date: 07/20/2020
---

# Debug high CPU usage in .NET Core

**This article applies to: ✔️** .NET Core 3.1 SDK and later versions

> In this tutorial, you'll learn how to debug an excessive CPU scenario. Using the provided example [ASP.NET Core web app](https://docs.microsoft.com/samples/dotnet/samples/diagnostic-scenarios) source code repository, you can cause a deadlock intentionally. The endpoint will experience a hang, and thread accumulation. You'll learn how you can use various tools to diagnose this scenario, with several key pieces of diagnostics data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this tutorial, you'll learn how to debug an excessive CPU usage scenario. Using the provided example [ASP.NET Core web app](https://docs.microsoft.com/samples/dotnet/samples/diagnostic-scenarios) source code repository, you can cause a deadlock intentionally. The endpoint will experience a hang and thread accumulation. You'll learn how you can use various tools to diagnose this scenario with several key pieces of diagnostics data.
```

In this tutorial, you will:

> [!div class="checklist"]
>

> > - Investigate high CPU

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> - Investigate high CPU usage
```

> > - Determine CPU with [dotnet-counters](dotnet-counters.md)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> - Determine CPU usage with [dotnet-counters](dotnet-counters.md)
```

> - Use [dotnet-trace](dotnet-trace.md) for trace generation
> - Profile performance in PerfView

> > - Diagnose and solve excessive CPU

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> - Diagnose and solve excessive CPU usage
```

## Prerequisites

The tutorial uses:

- [.NET Core 3.1 SDK](https://dotnet.microsoft.com/download/dotnet-core) or a later version.
- [Sample debug target](https://docs.microsoft.com/samples/dotnet/samples/diagnostic-scenarios) to trigger the scenario.
- [dotnet-trace](dotnet-trace.md) to list processes and generate a profile.
- [dotnet-counters](dotnet-counters.md) to monitor cpu usage.

## CPU counters

Before attempting to collect diagnostics data, you need to observe a high CPU condition. Run the [sample application](https://docs.microsoft.com/samples/dotnet/samples/diagnostic-scenarios) using the following command from the project root directory.

```dotnetcli
dotnet run
```

To find the process ID, use the following command:

```dotnetcli
dotnet-trace ps
```

> Take note of the process ID from your command output (yours will be different), ours was `22884`. To check the current CPU, use the [dotnet-counters](dotnet-counters.md) tool command:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Take note of the process ID from your command output. Our process ID was `22884`, but yours will be different. To check the current CPU usage, use the [dotnet-counters](dotnet-counters.md) tool command:
```

```dotnetcli
dotnet-counters monitor --refresh-interval 1 -p 22884
```

> Our process ID was `22884` (again, yours will be different), and was found using `dotnet-trace ps`. The `refresh-interval` is the number of seconds between the counter polling CPU values. The output should be similar to the output:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `refresh-interval` is the number of seconds between the counter polling CPU values. The output should be similar to the following:
```

[System.Runtime]
    % Time in GC since last GC (%)                         0
    Allocation Rate / 1 sec (B)                            0
    CPU Usage (%)                                          0
    Exception Count / 1 sec                                0
    GC Heap Size (MB)                                      4
    Gen 0 GC Count / 60 sec                                0
    Gen 0 Size (B)                                         0
    Gen 1 GC Count / 60 sec                                0
    Gen 1 Size (B)                                         0
    Gen 2 GC Count / 60 sec                                0
    Gen 2 Size (B)                                         0
    LOH Size (B)                                           0
    Monitor Lock Contention Count / 1 sec                  0
    Number of Active Timers                                1
    Number of Assemblies Loaded                          140
    ThreadPool Completed Work Item Count / 1 sec           3
    ThreadPool Queue Length                                0
    ThreadPool Thread Count                                7
    Working Set (MB)                                      63
```

> With the web app running, immediately after startup, the CPU isn't being consumed at all, and is reported at `0%`. Navigate to the `api/diagscenario/highcpu` route with `60000` as the route parameter:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With the web app running, immediately after startup, the CPU isn't being consumed at all and is reported at `0%`. Navigate to the `api/diagscenario/highcpu` route with `60000` as the route parameter:
```

[https://localhost:5001/api/diagscenario/highcpu/60000](https://localhost:5001/api/diagscenario/highcpu/60000)

Now, rerun the [dotnet-counters](dotnet-counters.md) command. To monitor just the `cpu-usage`, specify `System.Runtime[cpu-usage]` as part of the command.

```dotnetcli
dotnet-counters monitor System.Runtime[cpu-usage] -p 22884 --refresh-interval 1
```

You should see an increase in CPU usage as shown below:

```console
Press p to pause, r to resume, q to quit.
    Status: Running

[System.Runtime]
    CPU Usage (%)                                         25
```

> Throughout the duration of the request, the CPU will hover around 25% - depending on the host machine, expect varying CPU.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Throughout the duration of the request, the CPU usage will hover around 25% . Depending on the host machine, expect varying CPU usage.
```

> [!TIP]

> > To visualize an even higher CPU, you can exercise this endpoint in multiple browser tabs simultaneously.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> To visualize an even higher CPU usage, you can exercise this endpoint in multiple browser tabs simultaneously.
```

At this point, you can safely say the CPU is running higher than you expect.

## Trace generation

When analyzing a slow request, you need a diagnostics tool that can provide insights into what the code is doing. The usual choice is a profiler, and there are different profiler options to choose from.

### [Linux](#tab/linux)

The `perf` tool can be used to generate .NET Core app profiles. Exit the previous instance of the [sample debug target](https://docs.microsoft.com/samples/dotnet/samples/diagnostic-scenarios).

> Set the `COMPlus_PerfMapEnabled` to cause the .NET Core app to create a `map` file in the `/tmp` directory. This `map` file is used by `perf` to map CPU address to JIT-generated functions by name. For more information, see [Write perf map](../run-time-config/debugging-profiling.md#write-perf-map).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Set the `COMPlus_PerfMapEnabled` environment variable to cause the .NET Core app to create a `map` file in the `/tmp` directory. This `map` file is used by `perf` to map CPU address to JIT-generated functions by name. For more information, see [Write perf map](../run-time-config/debugging-profiling.md#write-perf-map).
```

Run the [sample debug target](https://docs.microsoft.com/samples/dotnet/samples/diagnostic-scenarios) in the same terminal session.

```dotnetcli
export COMPlus_PerfMapEnabled=1
dotnet run
```

> Exercise the high CPU API (<https://localhost:5001/api/diagscenario/highcpu/60000>) endpoint again, and while its running within the 1-minute request, run the `perf` command with your process ID:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Exercise the high CPU API (<https://localhost:5001/api/diagscenario/highcpu/60000>) endpoint again. While it's running within the 1-minute request, run the `perf` command with your process ID:
```

```bash
sudo perf record -p 2266 -g
```

> The `perf` command will start the performance collection process. Let it run for about 20-30 seconds, then press <kbd>Ctrl+C</kbd> to exit the collection process. You can use the same `perf` command to see the output of the trace.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `perf` command starts the performance collection process. Let it run for about 20-30 seconds, then press <kbd>Ctrl+C</kbd> to exit the collection process. You can use the same `perf` command to see the output of the trace.
```

```bash
sudo perf report -f
```

You can also generate a _flame-graph_ by using the following commands:

```bash
git clone --depth=1 https://github.com/BrendanGregg/FlameGraph
sudo perf script | FlameGraph/stackcollapse-perf.pl | FlameGraph/flamegraph.pl > flamegraph.svg
```

> This command will generate a `flamegraph.svg` that you can view in the browser to investigate the performance problem:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This command generates a `flamegraph.svg` that you can view in the browser to investigate the performance problem:
```

[![Flame graph SVG image](media/flamegraph.jpg)](media/flamegraph.jpg#lightbox)

### [Windows](#tab/windows)

> On Windows, you can use the [dotnet-trace](dotnet-trace.md) tool as a profiler. Using the previous [sample debug target](https://docs.microsoft.com/samples/dotnet/samples/diagnostic-scenarios), exercise the high CPU (<https://localhost:5001/api/diagscenario/highcpu/60000>) endpoint again, and while its running within the 1-minute request, use the `collect` command as follows:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
On Windows, you can use the [dotnet-trace](dotnet-trace.md) tool as a profiler. Using the previous [sample debug target](https://docs.microsoft.com/samples/dotnet/samples/diagnostic-scenarios), exercise the high CPU (<https://localhost:5001/api/diagscenario/highcpu/60000>) endpoint again. While it's running within the 1-minute request, use the `collect` command as follows:
```

```dotnetcli
dotnet-trace collect -p 22884 --providers Microsoft-DotNETCore-SampleProfiler
```

> Let [dotnet-trace](dotnet-trace.md) run for about 20-30 seconds, and then press the <kbd>Enter</kbd> to exit the collection. The result is a `nettrace` file located in the same folder. The `nettrace` files are a great way to use existing analysis tools on **Windows**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let [dotnet-trace](dotnet-trace.md) run for about 20-30 seconds, and then press the <kbd>Enter</kbd> to exit the collection. The result is a `nettrace` file located in the same folder. The `nettrace` files are a great way to use existing analysis tools on Windows.
```
